Telemetry Operator: Input documentation (#15035)
kyma-project/kyma: docs/01-overview/main-areas/observability/obsv-04-telemetry-in-kyma.md

The Telemetry Operator watches all LogPipeline resources and related Secrets. Whenever the configuration changes, it validates the configuration (with a [validating webhook](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/)) and generates a new configuration for the Fluent Bit DaemonSet, where several ConfigMaps for the different aspects of the configuration are generated. Furthermore, referenced Secrets are copied into one Secret that is mounted to the DaemonSet as well.

## Setting up a LogPipeline

> ### Step 1: Create an Input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 1: Create an input
```
Our guidelines want [sentence case](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology/#capitalization) in headlines.

> 1. To create a LogPipeline and define from which resources logs should be included create a LogPipeline with a name and spec with input:

Reviewer: Trying to shorten and simplify this:

```suggestion
1. Create a LogPipeline with a `name` and `spec` with **input**, which defines from which resources logs are included:
```

    ```yaml
    kind: LogPipeline
    apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
    metadata:
      name: http-backend
    spec:
      input: ...
    ```

> 2. As of now only `application` input can be set, meaning the LogPipeline will collect application logs, which is also the default, when omitting the input altogether.

Reviewer: We should [avoid words like "currently"](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology/#terminology) etc. 

Btw, if it's the default and the only option at the moment, why do we instruct the user to define it at all? Is this step necessary as long as we only support application logs? How about phrasing it as a "Note" as long as there's no other option? We can resurrect it as a step once more kinds of logs are supported.

```suggestion
   > **NOTE:** By default, the LogPipeline collects application logs, so you don't have to specify the input. To specify the input, run:
```

    ```yaml
    spec:
      input:
        application: ...
    ```

> 3. Selection mechanisms for application logs can be applied on namespace or container level. If nothing is set all namespaces will be considered except the system namespaces `kube-system`, `istio-system`, `kyma-system`, `kyma-integration` which are excluded by default.

Reviewer: We prefer [active voice](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology#style-and-terminology-active-voice) :)

```suggestion
3. Optionally, you can apply selection mechanisms for application logs on Namespace or container level.
   If nothing is set, all Namespaces are considered, except the system Namespaces `kube-system`, `istio-system`, `kyma-system`, and `kyma-integration`, which are excluded by default.
```

    ```yaml
    spec:
      input:
        application:
          namespaces: []
          excludeNamespaces: []
          containers: []
          excludeContainers: []
          includeSystemNamespaces: false
    ```

> Valid input example:

Reviewer: If this belongs to step 3, add 3 blank spaces indentation in this and the following lines.
If this is separate of step 3, what is it? A summary of the instructions? Then we could define it as a result of the whole "Step 1: Create an input" instructions.

```suggestion
### Result

You've created a valid input. See the following example:
```

  ```yaml
  spec:
    input:
      application:
        includeSystemNamespaces: true
        excludeContainers:
          - fluent-bit
  ```

> ### Step 2: Create an Output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Create an output
```
Our guidelines want [sentence case](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology/#capitalization) in headlines.

> 1. To ship application logs to a new output, define an output spec for the LogPipeline like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To ship application logs to a new output, define an output spec for the LogPipeline:
```

    ```yaml
    kind: LogPipeline
      apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
      metadata:
        name: http-backend
    spec:
      output:
        http:
          dedot: false
          format: "json"
          host:
            valueFrom:
              secretKeyRef:
                name: my-secret
                namespace: my-namespace
                key: host
          port: "80"
          uri: "/"
          user:
            value: "user"
          password:
            value: "not-required"
          tls:
            disabled: true
            skipCertificateValidation: true
      input:
        ...
    ```

>    An output is a data destination configured by a [Fluent Bit output](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/outputs) of the relevant type. The LogPipeline supports the following output types: 

Reviewer: Consider putting this explanatory paragraph (lines 131-134) below the headline (line 98), above the first step (line 100).

## Setting up a LogPipeline

### Step 1: Create an Input

1. To create a LogPipeline and define from which resources logs should be included create a LogPipeline with a name and spec with input:
    ```yaml
    kind: LogPipeline
    apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
    metadata:
      name: http-backend
    spec:
      input: ...
    ```

2. As of now only `application` input can be set, meaning the LogPipeline will collect application logs, which is also the default, when omitting the input altogether.
    ```yaml
    spec:
      input:
        application: ...
    ```

3. Selection mechanisms for application logs can be applied on namespace or container level. If nothing is set all namespaces will be considered except the system namespaces `kube-system`, `istio-system`, `kyma-system`, `kyma-integration` which are excluded by default.
    ```yaml
    spec:
      input:
        application:
          namespaces: []
          excludeNamespaces: []
          containers: []
          excludeContainers: []
          includeSystemNamespaces: false
    ```

Selectors:

> - `namespaces`: a list of namespaces logs should be collected from (mutually exclusive with `exludeNamespaces`)

Reviewer 2: Maybe we move this to the "Parameters" section at the end?

Author: Of course... done 👍

    ```
    An output is a data destination configured by a [Fluent Bit output](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/outputs) of the relevant type. The LogPipeline supports the following output types: 

    - `http`, which pushes the data to the specified http destination.
    - `custom`, which supports the configuration of any destination in the Fluent Bit configuration syntax.     

    See the following example of the `custom` output:
    ```yaml
    spec:
      output:
        custom: |
          Name               http
          Host               https://myhost/logs
          Http_User          user
          Http_Passwd        not-required
          Format             json
          Port               80
          Uri                /
          Tls                Off
    ```

2. To create the instance, apply the resource file in your cluster.
    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f path/to/my-log-pipeline.yaml
    ```

3. Check that the status of the LogPipeline in your cluster is `Ready`:
    ```bash
    kubectl get logpipeline
    NAME              STATUS    AGE
    http-backend      Ready     44s
    ```

### Step 2: Create an input

> To restrict or specify from which resources logs should be included an input spec can be defined optionally, if selection mechanisms for application logs on Namespace or container level are needed.

Reviewer: Passive => Active voice

```suggestion
If you need selection mechanisms for application logs on Namespace or container level, you can restrict or specify from which resources logs are included with an input spec.
```

> Defining an input can be omitted entireley to collect from all Namespaces, except the system Namespaces `kube-system`, `istio-system`, `kyma-system`, and `kyma-integration`, which are excluded by default. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't define any input, it's collected from all Namespaces, except the system Namespaces `kube-system`, `istio-system`, `kyma-system`, and `kyma-integration`, which are excluded by default. 
```

```yaml
kind: LogPipeline
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: http-backend
spec:
  input:
    application:
      namespaces: []
      excludeNamespaces: []
      containers: []
      excludeContainers: []
      includeSystemNamespaces: false
  output:
    ...
```

> Example, to collect from all namespaces including system namespaces but excluding on container level from fluent-bit:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example collects input from all Namespaces including system Namespaces, but excludes the Fluent Bit container:
```

   http-backend      Ready     44s
   ```

### Step 3: Add filters

> To enrich logs with attributes or drop whole lines, add filters to the existing pipeline. In the following example, three filters are added, which are executed in sequence.

Reviewer: Might be simpler this way:

```suggestion
To enrich logs with attributes or drop whole lines, add filters to the existing pipeline. 
The following example contains three filters, which are executed in sequence.
```

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|---|---|---|

> | input | object | Definition where to collect logs including selector mechanims. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| input | object | Definition where to collect logs, including selector mechanisms. |
```

| input.application | object | Input type for application logs collection. |

> | input.application.namespaces | []string | List of namespaces logs should be collected from (mutually exclusive with `exludeNamespaces`). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| input.application.namespaces | []string | List of Namespaces from which logs are collected (mutually exclusive with `exludeNamespaces`). |
```

> | input.application.excludeNamespaces | []string | List namespaces to exclude from log collection from all namespaces (mutually exclusive with `namespaces`) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| input.application.excludeNamespaces | []string | List of Namespaces to exclude during log collection from all Namespaces (mutually exclusive with `namespaces`) |
```

> | input.application.containers | []string | List of container names to collect from (mutually exclusive with `excludeContainers`) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| input.application.containers | []string | List of containers to collect from (mutually exclusive with `excludeContainers`) |
```

> | input.application.excludeContainers | []string | List of container names to exclude (mutually exclusive with `containers`) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| input.application.excludeContainers | []string | List of containers to exclude (mutually exclusive with `containers`) |
```

> | input.application.includeSystemNamespaces | boolean | If no selection from `namespaces` or `exludeNamespaces` is done, this can be set to include all system namespaces without listing them manually. Defaults to `false`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| input.application.includeSystemNamespaces | boolean | If you specify neither `namespaces` nor `excludeNamespaces`, you can set `includeSystemNamespaces` to include all system Namespaces without listing them manually. Defaults to `false`. |
```
